This lesson will cover how to
customize your shell prompt.
As you've seen earlier in this course,
default prompts can vary
from system to system.
No matter what shell you're using,
you can customize your prompt by
setting an environment variable.
For shells like bash, ksh, and sh,
the environment variable $PS1 is used
to set the primary prompt stream.
For shells like Csh, tcsh and zsh,
they use a $prompt environment variable.
The format stream in place in and
environment variable determines
the look and feel of your prompt.
Each shell uses uses slightly
different format strings, so
consult the documentation for
the shell that you are using.
Let's look at customizing the bash prompt
since bash is the most popular default
shell for user accounts on Linux systems.
These are some of the most commonly
used formatting stream options for bash.
\d will give you the date in the weekday,
month, date format.
\h will give you the host name up to
the first dot or the short host name.
\H will give you the fully qualified
domain name of the server.
\n will give you a new line so
you can have a multi-line prompt.
\t will give you current
time in 24-hour format,
while \T will give you the current
time in 12-hour format.
\@ will give you the current time in
12-hour format with AM and PM included.
\A will give you the current time in
24-hour format just using using hours and
minutes.
\U is the user name of the current user.
\w is the current working directory.
\W will give you the base name
of the current working directory
instead of the full path.
\$ will let you know if
you're a normal user.
It will display $.
Or if you're the super user or
root account, it will display a #.
For a complete listing of all the
formatting options, see the bash man page.
To make your customized shell
prompt persist between logins,
add the PS1 value to your
personal initialization files.
Personal initialization files
are commonly referred to as dot files,
since they begin with a dot or a period.
You could also use Nano, vVI or
Emacs to edit your dash Bash_profile file.
This example just uses echo
to accomplish the same thing.
Let's look at our current prompt string.
And let's change it in some way.
Let's set it to username add host.
And you can see that it's customized now.
Let's add the time to our prompt.
And the working directory too.
And the tilde you can see
represents our home directory.
Let's go to /var/log,
so you can see that /var/log
is the current directory.
And let's use base names for directories
this time, with that capital W.
Now you can see that even though
we're in /var/log, it only says, log.
Let's go back to our home directory.
If we want to persist changes between
logins, we need to put these in our
personalization file, so
let's edit bash_profile.
Set this environment variable,
we'll just set it to this to
show that it's going to work.
We'll include our user name,
the host we're on,
the directory we're in, and a dollar.
And now you can see that the prompt
is retained between log-ins.
Let's do one more thing.
Let's make a multiline prompt.
We'll put time on one line.
And let's put post and
working directory on the next line.
Clear the screen here.
And you can see that every time that
we hit Enter, we get a new prompt with
the current time on one line and a normal
pool looking prompt on the second line.
Shell prompts can be customized by
setting an environment variable.
This can differ from shell to shell.
Lot of shells use PS1, others use prompt.
To save your custom shell prompt between
log ins, you need to add that environment
variable setting to your
personal initialization files,
such as .bash profile.